Some statistical aspects of biological network analysis

St√©phane Robin

UMR 518 AgroParisTech / INRA Applied Mathematics and Computer Sciences

Network analysis has become a major challenge in biology as network is
a natural way to describe interactions between molecules, individual,
species, etc. Networks are also interesting from a statistical point
of view as they constitute a very specific data structure. In the last
decade, many statistical developments have been inspired by biological
network analysis. The aim of this talk is to introduce some of them,
focusing on several works recently developed within the ANR program
'Network Motif'.

Understanding gene regulation is a key issue to better understand the
functioning of the cell as a whole. Many efforts have been put on the
inference of the regulatory network, based on expression data. The
Gaussian graphical model (GGM) rapidly emerged as an efficient
framework, where the inference of the network can be related to these
of an (inverse) covariance matrix. As the network is expected to be
sparse, regularized (or penalized) regression techniques are often
used. The form of the regularization term can be adapted to account
for some prior information about the network to be inferred.

Many data are now represented as graphs of large size. In such
networks, the nodes most often display very heterogeneous connectivity
profiles, making most naive random graph models irrelevant. Mixture
models are a classical way in statistics to retrieve some underlying
structure among objects. The stochastic-block model (SBM) is a mixture
model for random graph, and some progresses have been recently made
about its inference. As it is an explicit statistical model, the SBM
can be enriched to account for exogenous information.

The structure of a network can also be studied at a lower scale,
trying to isolate recurrent local patterns that could be interpreted
as building blocks of the network. Most informative patterns (also
call 'motifs') are expected to be either over- or under-represented,
with respect to some relevant null model. The detection of exceptional
motifs in a graph raises interesting issues both in algorithmics and
in statistics.

