Uncovering structure and motifs in biological networks

S. Robin

Getting and analysing biological interaction networks is at the core
of systems biology. To help understanding these complex networks, many
recent works have suggested to focus (i) the global topology of the
network and (ii) on motifs which occur more frequently than expected
in random.

Looking for a latent structure is one of the many strategies used to
better understand the behaviour of a network. Several methods already
exist for the binary case. We present a model-based strategy to
uncover groups of nodes in both binary and valued graphs. This
framework can be used for a wide span of parametric random graphs
models. Variational tools allow us to achieve approximate maximum
likelihood estimation of the parameters of these models. We provide
several examples, showing that the proposed methodology can be applied
to a broad range of biological networks.

To identify exceptional motifs in a given network, we propose a
statistical and analytical method which does not require any
simulation. For this, we first provide an analytical expression of the
mean and variance of the count under any stationary random graph
model. Then we approximate the motif count distribution by a compound
Poisson distribution whose parameters are derived from the mean and
variance of the count. Thanks to simulations, we show that the quality
of our compound Poisson approximation is very good and highly better
than a Gaussian or a Poisson one. The compound Poisson distribution
can then be used to get an approximate $p$-value and to decide if an
observed count is significantly high or not. 

We compare our method to the Mfinder software on PPI data and discuss
the choice of a relevant random graph model to detect over-represented
motifs.

Joint work with J.-J. Daudin, M. Koskas, M. Mariadassou, F. Picard and
S. Schbath
